# What Established Mobbing Looks Like

On the first day Joy came into the office, the team was already working. She sat down watching them as they said hello. She was surprised when they just continued on their way, but even more surprised when a few minutes later timer went off and they added her name on the rotation list.  She was nervous at first, a lot of what they were saying was unfamiliar. And she did not want to appear stupid in front of the group. But everyone else was taking their turn, so when it was her turn, she went up to the keyboard making a small joke to remind that she was new.

It was not so hard. People seemed to know where she needed help, and gave lots of details and hints to help her through the new areas. Still she was relieved when the timer went off and she went back to the group. The ideas seemed to be coming from the team as opposed to a single leader. Some of the team members would become more quiet, but then speak up from time to time, warning of a mistake or forgotten requirement.

She started to notice that different people of the team had different strengths they brought to the mob. Eric was the most senior member and been at the company for a long time. Many times people would ask for information about obscure code or piece of history from him. Jessica seemed to always be one step ahead on her laptop, often pulling up sample code from Stack Overflow right about when team was about to run into problems. Timothy did the same thing but with real people, often going to a product manager, analyst or another section of a company and bringing over the person we needed to talk to. Steve seemed to be the most into the geeky language features of the code, often suggesting optimizations or technologies we should be using right now.

Soon Joy started to feel comfortable asking questions. Not just comfortable but like she understood enough to ask valuable questions. Sometimes instead of direct answer, the mob would just say "Oh, we had not thought of that". It was odd being able to contribute without knowing the answer herself. One time when they were stuck understanding why the prediction engine was working the way it was, she asked "Why do you expect it to give this result?" "Because of the pricing history", Timothy responded. "Not the pricing history", said Eric. "It's the browsing history." "Oh, right", said Jessica. "We need to cross-reference that data or it will never work." Joy saw this a lot. Different insights into the code coming from different people. Even in the code they had just written. She could not identify whose idea it really was. This also came into play when the code broke. In her last job, she remembers people getting teased mercilessly when it was discovered they had written a bug. Here, when something went wrong, there was no sense of defense or attack.

Instead, they would often do small retrospectives. Asking for ideas on how to prevent it from happening next time. Brainstorming on sticky notes and categorizing them on the wall. There was a lot of writings on the wall. People would sketch out scenarios on the whiteboard. And she mentioned she did not understand the mechanics of S-expressions, a couple of other people admitted they did not either and they added a post-it note on the learning hour ideas. She'd have to make sure to get in earlier tomorrow so she did not miss the learning hour.

By the end of the day, she was already feeling part of the team. She noticed that everyone had their chair set up to comfortably look at the wall all day. She was planning on bringing in her cushion for tomorrow. But more than the environment, she noticed that the ideas she was having were being listened to. It seemed like people were giving her a little extra space, because surely the other members of the mob could contribute the things she was doing right now. The fact that they were willing to let her, the new person, guide a little bit, really meant a lot.

The day came to an end at 5 pm, Joy was relieved to see that they were not working late into the night. It made it easier for her to get home on time.
